---
layout: post
title: Setting Up a FreeIPA Network
tagline: System and identity management on Fedora 27 and CentOS 7.4
---

In this brief guide, I'll walk you through setting up a FreeIPA network under
the Red Hat family of operating systems.

# What is FreeIPA?

[FreeIPA][freeipa] is Red Hat's answer to Microsoft's [Active
Directory][active-directory] service. It uses a combination of [LDAP][ldap] and
[Kerberos][kerberos] to provide a centralised system of identity and system
configuration management.

FreeIPA can provide user authentication and authorization for system login and
access to network services such as [NFS][nfs] and can manage configuration of
system services including [DNS][dns], [automount][automount] and [sudo][sudo].

This guide will walk through setting up a basic FreeIPA network with server and
client with all of the aforementioned services. In this case, the server will be
running under [CentOS][centos] 7.4 and the client will be running under
[Fedora][fedora] 27, however the process will be much the same for other
versions of CentOS, Fedora, and [Red Hat Enterprise Linux][rhel].

> For more detailed instructions on configuring and managing FreeIPA, check out
> the [Linux Domain Identity, Authentication, and Policy Guide][ipa-guide] from
> Red Hat.

[freeipa]: https://www.freeipa.org/
[active-directory]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_Directory
[ldap]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lightweight_Directory_Access_Protocol
[kerberos]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerberos_(protocol)
[dns]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domain_Name_System
[nfs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_File_System
[automount]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Automounter
[sudo]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sudo
[centos]: https://www.centos.org/
[fedora]: https://getfedora.org/
[rhel]: https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/linux-platforms/enterprise-linux
[ipa-guide]: https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/index

# Configuring the Server

> See [Installing and Uninstalling an Identity Management
> Server](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/installing-ipa)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

FreeIPA generally uses hostnames and domain names to identify hosts that it
manages. This gives the benefit of allowing for host with dynamically allocated
IP addresses. [DNS][dns] is required to ensure that a hostname can always be
used to resolve the same host.

FreeIPA also uses DNS to discover the server and domain name to use when joining
from a network managed by the service.

The FreeIPA server will require that its [Fully Qualified Domain Name][fqdn]
will actually resolve to its own hostname.

> You should make sure that the domain you are using a domain name that you
> actually own and control for your network.
>
> [Namecheap](https://www.namecheap.com/) is one service that can provide cheap
> domain names.

## IP Address Configuration

You will need to make sure that your server's IP address is statically
configured. You can use the `nmcli` tool to configure your network settings.

To list your network connections:

```
ipa-server$ nmcli connection
```

To set the IP address of a connection (making sure to set the netmask with the
address correctly):

<pre><code>ipa-server$ nmcli connection modify <i>connection</i> ipv4.address <i>ip-address</i>/<i>netmask</i></code></pre>

## Hostname Configuration

The name of the host itself should be changed to the desired FQDN of the host.

<pre><code>ipa-server$ hostnamectl set-hostname <i>hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i></code></pre>

Also, the `/etc/hosts` file needs to be updated to also include the FQDN of
the server. The first line in the `/etc/hosts` file should map the public IP
address that was configured to the FQDN of the host, followed by the single
hostname.

<pre><code># /etc/hosts

<i>ip-address</i> <i>hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i> <i>hostname</i>
...</code></pre>

[fqdn]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fully_qualified_domain_name


## Configuring FreeIPA

Download and configure the server software as follows:

```
ipa-server$ yum install -y freeipa-server
ipa-server$ ipa-server-install
```
> At the time of writing, there are some issues with SELinux denying FreeIPA
> from managing the BIND nameserver. It is recommended to configure and manage
> BIND manually.
>
> An addition to the SELinux issue, FreeIPA does not appear to correctly populate
> the BIND zones.
>
> This does mean that either DHCPd will be required to manage DDNS or that
> static DNS will need to be used.

Once the server has been installed, you will need to configure the firewall to
allow traffic to the network sources.

```
ipa-server$ firewall-cmd --permanent \
    --add-service kerberos \
    --add-service ntp \
    --add-service http \
    --add-service https \
    --add-service ldap \
    --add-service ldaps \
    --add-service kpasswd
ipa-server$ firewall-cmd --reload
```

## NSSwitch for Sudoers

To ensure that the system services correctly pick up their configuration from
FreeIPA, you should modify the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` file to add the following
line:

```
# /etc/nsswitch

...
sudoers: files sss
...
```

The `sss` option may need to be added to other sections of the
`/etc/nsswitch.conf` file.

## Reboot

After a reboot for good measure, you should now have a functioning FreeIPA
server.

> FreeIPA can be easily uninstalled with the following command:
> 
> ```
> ipa-server$ ipa-server-install --uninstall
> ```

# Configuring a Client

> See [Installing and Uninstalling Identity Management
> Clients](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/setting-up-clients)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

## Hostname Configuration

Much like the server, the name of the host itself should be changed to the
desired FQDN of the host.

<pre><code>client$ hostnamectl set-hostname <i>hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i></code></pre>

## Configuring FreeIPA

First, you'll need to download the software packages and run the configuration
tool on the client:

<pre><code>client$ dnf install freeipa-client
client$ ipa-client-install \
    --hostname <i>hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i> \
    --domain <i>network-domain</i> \
    --server <i>server-hostname</i>.<i>network-domainM</i></code></pre>

Unless you have set up another administrator, you will need to use the `admin`
user configured when you set up the server to *join* the FreeIPA system.

## NSSwitch for Sudoers

To ensure that the system services correctly pick up their configuration from
FreeIPA, you should modify the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` file to add the following
line:

```
# /etc/nsswitch

...
sudoers: files sss
...
```

The `sss` option may need to be added to other sections of the
`/etc/nsswitch.conf` file.

## Reboot

After a reboot for good measure, you should now have a functioning FreeIPA
client.

> FreeIPA can be easily uninstalled with the following command:
> 
> ```
> client$ ipa-client-install --uninstall
> ```

# Configuring the NFS Server

> See [Setting up a Kerberos-aware NFS
> Server](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/kerb-nfs#krb-nfs-server)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

First, a ticket must first be obtained.

```
nfs-server$ kinit admin
```

A service principal must then be added for the server that is providing the NFS
service.

<pre><code>nfs-server$ ipa service-add nfs/<i>nfs-server-hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i></code></pre>

The service principal must then be added to the server's keytab.

<pre><code>nfs-server$ ipa-getkeytab \
    -s <i>ipa-server</i>.<i>network-domain</i> \
    -p nfs/<i>nfs-server-hostname</i>.<i>network-domain</i> \
    -k /etc/krb5.keytab</code></pre>

The exports can then be added to the `/etc/exports` file. Exports should include
one of the following options:

* `sec=krb5`; which only uses kerberos for authentication,
* `sec=krb5i`; which uses kerberos for authentication and uses an integrity hash
  when communicating,
* `sec=krb5p`; which requires an encrypted connection as well as using kerberos
  for authentication, or
* `sec=krb5:krb5i:krb5p`; to allow for any of the above mechanisms.

```exports
# Example /etc/exports

/home 192.168.0.0/16(rw,sec=krb5p) 10.0.0.0/8(rw,sec=krb5p)
/export *(rw,sec=krb5)
```

Make sure to restart the NFS service once the exports have been changed.

```
nfs-server$ systemctl restart nfs-server
```

And then allow the relevant services through the firewall.

```
nfs-server$ firewall-cmd --permanent \
    --add-service nfs \
    --add-service rpc-bind \
    --add-service mountd
```

## Configuring Automount Rules

FreeIPA manages automount by *locations*. Each location is a set of automount
rules. When a automount client is configured, it is added to **one** of the
automount locations.

> See [Configuring
> Locations](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/adding-locations)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

Once a location has been configured (`default` exists when the server is
configured and is used by default when a client is configured for automount),
*maps* will need to be configured. A *map* is an association of a mount point and a
set of *keys*.

Each *location* will have the `auto.master` map, which maps individual maps to
their respective mountpoints, and the `auto.direct` map, which is used for
managing automounts that mount directly to the root of the client.

*Keys* within a *map* map actual devices to directories within the mount point
of the *map*.

> See [Configuring
> Maps](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/configuring-maps)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

### Network Home

An example use of automount would be to configure network home directories.
We'll assume that all clients in the `default` location will be using network
home directories. The home directories of all users are stored in the `/home`
directory on the *`nfs-server`*.

In the `default` location we'll add an *indirect map* called `auto.home` which
will mount on the `/home` directory of all clients.

> Setting up an *indirect map* will add the map to `auto.master` for us.

In the `auto.home` map, we'll add the key `*` with the following value:

<pre><code>-rw,soft <i>nfs-server</i>.<i>network-domain</i>:/home/&</code></pre>

As the users' home directory will be on a network share, new users will not be
able to have home directories automatically created for them, so the will need
to be created manually on the server. You may want to create a script for
creating new users and generating their home directories.

# Configuring an Automount NFS Client

> See [Configuring
> Automount](https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-us/red_hat_enterprise_linux/7/html/linux_domain_identity_authentication_and_policy_guide/configuring-automount)
> from the [IPA Guide][ipa-guide].

> For mobile devices, it is not recommended to use a network home directory.
> Instead, it is recommended that a home directory be made on each device the
> user logs into.
>
> To enable this behaviour on a client, run the following command before
> restarting:
>
> ```
> client$ authconfig --enablemkhomedir --update
> ```

For a client to use the automounts in a given *location*, it will need to be
added to that automount location.

<pre><code>client$ ipa-client-automount --location <i>location</i></code></pre>

> If the `--location` argument is omitted, the `default` location will be used.

Once the client has been added to the location, the `/etc/nsswitch.conf` file
will need to be edited to enable automount configuration to be loaded from
`sssd`.

```
# /etc/nsswitch.conf

...
automount: files sss
...
```

Then the relevent services should be restarted.

```
client$ systemctl restart sssd autofs nfs-client.target
```

# Using Your FreeIPA System

Now you should have a fully functioning FreeIPA system. For maintenance tasks,
the web interface can be accessed via a web browser by navigating to you FreeIPA
server.

For more information on managing FreeIPA, I'd recommend reading through the [IPA
Guide][ipa-guide].
